---
layout: page
title: ""
description: "CINVESTAV Sede Sur, Mexico"
feature_image: "/assets/images/projects_banner.png"
order: 3
---

## Projects

### Medical Genomics 
The use of genomic data, such as that generated by the Mexican Biobank, enables a deeper understanding of diseases and the genetic risks present in the population. With this in mind, we leverage the Mexican Biobank to conduct genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to identify links between phenotypes and genotypes, as well as to examine the allele frequencies of previously reported variants. These analyses help characterize the genetic predisposition to various health conditions and support the development of more precise and effective strategies to improve the health of the Mexican population.

### Epigenetic landscape in Latin America
This work is an ambitious extension of LatinGenomes initiative and its main objective is to create an extensive cohort of DNA methylation research in the region. As most of the epigenetic studies and understanding are shaped by European ancestry, we directly address this knowledge gap by focusing on genetically admixed and environmentally diverse populations in Latin America. This project will provide a detailed atlas of DNA methylation patterns and it is therefore a critical step towards a truly global understanding of the human epigenome.

### Human Evolution and Adaptation
We study how natural selection has shaped genetic variation in human populations across Latin America and Oceania. Using genome-wide data from resources such as the Mexican Biobank, we characterize patterns of selection across diverse ecological and demographic contexts. By integrating haplotype-based methods, allele frequency analyses, and local ancestry inference, we uncover signatures of adaptation in historically underrepresented populations. Linking these findings to biological pathways, environmental pressures, and clinical implications, we provide insights into how evolutionary processes have influenced the genetics of present-day populations.